>> Kyle Simpson: We need to understand
why functional programming.
That's a really key critical thing and
and let me even be meta about it.
Why do we need to understand
why functional programming?
You're already here.
You're already watching this course.
That seems like it ought
to be too obvious.
You have some curiosity.
And I'm willing to bet that if we surveyed
everyone that's watching right now,
we'd get lots of different
answers as to why you're here,
why is this the time that
you've chosen to invest.
Why have you chosen this
particular moment in your career?
Maybe there's something happening at work.
Maybe there's a shift happening and you
feel like you're getting left behind and
you wanna keep up.
Maybe you've been curious about it,
maybe you're already super experienced and
you're just listening to hear
me trip up and make a mistake.
And that's probably gonna happen, too.
So there's a wide range of
motivations that might be.
But I want to give you one that
may not be obvious to you.
I want to tell you that one of
the biggest reasons why you should learn
functional programming and why this should
matter and why we need to discuss that,
is because it is impossible,
at least in my opinion, impossible for
you to write functional
programming in isolation.
It is impossible for
you to go back to work tomorrow or
the next day, and send in a pull
request where you've rewritten a whole
section of your code using some new
technique that we learn in this course.
And then all of a sudden, just magically,
that's gonna land in the code and
everybody's gonna be happy and
thumbs up about it.
You can't take this journey up
the side of the cliff face alone.
You're going to have to convince
the people that you collaborate with
that there's value in the journey as well.
So while you're sitting
here watching this course,
you need to understand that whoever it is
that you work with now and in the future.
You're gonna have to be able to convince
them to come on the journey as well.
You're gonna have to convince them that
climbing straight up the side of a cliff
wall, which sounds crazy,
is actually worthwhile, okay?
That's why this conversation matters,
why functional programming?
I have some thoughts on why
functional programming, but
I'm sharing these because you're going
to have to, almost in a proxy sense,
you're going to have to share
those with the people around you.
You're gonna have to convince them.
One of the biggest reasons why
functional programming and
it's often touted, is that functional
programming signals a shift or
it signals a paradigm difference
in the way that you approach code.
And that can be incorporated in these
ideas of imperative programming
versus declarative programming.
Let's make sure we understand what those
words mean, because I don't want to just
throw words like carabiner at you and
not have them have a definition.
What does imperative mean?
The good news is, unless you already
are one of those unicorns who learned
programming from the beginning,
as a functional programmer, and
if you are, I'm envious of you, okay?
But unless you are like that, then you're
like all the rest of us, which is that you
learned non-functionally,
which is to say you learned imperatively.
Imperative code means code that is
focused primarily on how to do something.
If somebody tells you,
I've got a list of numbers that all needed
to be added up and get a final total sum.
Just me saying that
English sentence means,
that almost all of you had the same
code snippet that popped into your head.
If you have any experience
with programming at all.
All of you probably
conceived something like,
I'm gonna set up an accumulator
variable called Total.
And I'm gonna for loop over the array, and
I'm gonna add each element into
the total and then return the total.
>> Kyle Simpson: And if that's the way
that you thought about the problem, you're
in good company because that's the way all
the rest of us thought about the problem.
And that's the imperative approach because
that code, while it will work, and
while it's familiar and
while it's convenient, and
while it's probably pretty performant,
all of those are good things.
But that code is imperative
because the future reader of that
code has to read all of the code and,
in a sense,
almost mentally execute the code, before
they understand what it's purpose is.
They have to do that.
They can't simply glance at
this particular for loop and
immediately know exactly what that for
loop is doing.
They have to read it and execute a few
iterations and then convince themselves.
They have to infer from
the code what it's doing.
And you may think, well, that's not
a big deal, that's what programmers do.
We read code and
then we write code, of course.
Not a big deal.
Well it is kind of a big deal.
It is kind of a big deal because it
forces the reader to do something
that they're not actually
naturally gifted at doing.
Guess who's particularly
good at executing code.
The computer.
Who's not so great at executing code?
Our brains, they weren't built for that.
So any time that you write some code that
forces the person to execute it in their
head just so they can understand it, it's
code that's gonna be harder to understand.
And code that's harder to understand
is code that's harder to maintain,
to improve, to fix.
So what is declarative then?
If imperative is all focused, or
almost all focused on how,
declarative stands in opposition to that.
Because declarative says, no, no,
the how is not the important part.
The important part is the what,
the outcome.
And even more importantly than that, why?
I get this question a lot actually,
when people talk about code comments,
or maybe not a question, but
people will just assert things.
Some people will say,
code comments are evil.
Anytime you have a code comment,
it means that the code is terrible.
Code ought to self document itself.
I think that's nonsense.
Certainly there's a nugget
of truth in there but
we've taken it far to the extreme.
Code doesn't need to self document itself.
Code needs to tell a story,
it needs to communicate, that's for sure.
But it is a need to self document.
There is a purpose for code comments.
They're not an excuse for
not caring about your code.
A lot of people will go to the other
extreme and say, what does it matter how
bad the code as long as there's a code
comment, and I explained what I was doing.
That's good enough.
Actually, it's not good enough
because most of the time,
code comments are out
of sync with the code.
[LAUGH] So
it's even worse than it not being there.
A bad code comment is worse
than no comment at all,
because then the person spends twice
as much time spinning their wheels.
But on the topic of code comments, and
I'm using this as an illustration point
of the reason why declarative is useful.
On the topic of code comments,
my response is always, no, no, no,
you don't have to remove all comments, but
your comment should not duplicate
the narrative of what the code is doing.
Don't have a line of code
that says i plus plus, and
then put a code comment
that says increment i.
I can see that it's incrementing i.
I don't need a code comment
to tell me that, okay.
That's not the important reason for
that code comment.
Here's what I wanna know
from your code comment.
Why are you incrementing by one?
What is magical about one as
opposed to incrementing by two?
>> Kyle Simpson: That might be useful
information, that I want you to tell me.
That's what a code
comment should focus on.
It should focus on the why,
not the what, and
sometimes maybe it needs to focus on
the how if it's particularly confusing,
if there's something
particularly hard to understand.
But even in those cases, that's a clue
that maybe I could work on improving
that code, so that ideally all of
my code comments focus on why.
But we can go even further than that and
say, what if your code made it
obvious why it was doing something.
Well then,
you don't need a code comment there.
So I'm not saying no code comments.
I'm simply saying shift our perspective
from imperative to declarative.
Focus on, let's allow the system
to do what it does best,
it figures things out best.
And let's focus our code on why we need
that, why we need that what outcome.
What is it going to accomplish?
And why is that useful to us?
That's what our code should look like
to whatever extent we possibly can.
And to the extent that we can't,
that's what our code comments
should be explaining.
Are you following me?
So we wanna shift in this direction and
that is one of the biggest reasons for
why functional programming,
because functional programming is,
by its very nature, more declarative.
You notice that I'm couching this
in relative terminology because
there really aren't a lot of absolutes.
It's not like there's a little check box
that says, functional programming is
definitely declarative and
everything else is definitely not.
That's not how it is.
It's a spectrum.
It's relative.
From whatever perspective
you come at that question,
a piece of code could both look
imperative or declarative.
If you've done lots of very
declarative coding and
then you look at something that's a little
less declarative like a four loop,
you're gonna say that's imperative.
But if you've done nothing but ones and
zeros or assembly language programming,
and then you see something like a for
loop, you're gonna say, wow,
that's pretty declarative.
You follow where I'm coming from?
So it's perspective, it's relative.
But to whatever extent that we can shift
the focus for the reader of our code
towards the declarative away from
the imperative, it's gonna be easier for
them to understand, not only for
them but also for us, our future selves.